>> Brown: PRESIDENT OBAMA TOOK
HIS PUSH FOR TIGHTER GUN CONTROL
LAWS ON THE ROAD TODAY TO A
POLICE DEPARTMENT IN MINNESOTA.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT, WE GET
REACTION TO THE PRESIDENT'S
PROPOSAL TO BAN ASSAULT WEAPONS
AND INSTITUTE UNIVERSAL
BACKGROUND CHECKS FROM TWO LOCAL
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.
>> Brown: THEN, WE HAVE THE
STORY OF A NAVY SEAL, A SNIPER
IN THE IRAQ WAR AND BEST-SELLING
AUTHOR WHO WAS GUNNED DOWN BY A
FELLOW VETERAN AT A SHOOTING
RANGE IN TEXAS.
>> Ifill: MARGARET WARNER LOOKS
AT HOW ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS IN
MALI WERE SAVED, HIDDEN FROM
DESTRUCTION DURING THE CONFLICT
WITH ISLAMIST REBELS.
>> Brown: WHAT MAKES A GREAT
TEACHER?
HARI SREENIVASAN REPORTS ON A
CHARTER SCHOOL IN CONNECTICUT
THAT USES A CHECKLIST TO
EVALUATE AND KEEP THE BEST OF
THEM IN THE CLASSROOM.
>> WE HAVE PARENTS, STUDENTS,
PEER AND PRINCIPAL SURVEYS, SO
THE TEACHERS ARE REALLY GETTING
A WHOLE 360 TAKE ON WHAT THEY
ARE DOING WELL AND WHAT THEY
NEED TO IMPROVE.
>> Ifill: THE 500-YEAR-OLD BONES
UNEARTHED IN A PARKING LOT IN
ENGLAND ARE THOSE OF KING
RICHARD III.
JOHN BURNS OF THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" FILLS US IN.
>> Brown: AND WE CLOSE WITH A
CONVERSATION WITH A MASTER OF
THE SHORT STORY, WRITER GEORGE
SAUNDERS.
>> FOR ME, THE APPROACH HAS
BECOME TO GO INTO A STORY NOT
REALLY SURE WHAT I WANT TO SAY,
TRYING TO FIND SOME LITTLE SEED,
CRYSTAL, AN INTERESTING SENTENCE
OR AN IMAGE THAT LEADS TO AN
IDEA, AND AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE
DIVEST MYSELF OF ANY DEEP IDEAS
ABOUT IT.
>> Brown: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA MADE
HIS FIRST SECOND-TERM FORAY
OUTSIDE WASHINGTON TODAY, WITH A
CALL TO STOP GUN VIOLENCE.
IT WAS PART OF A CAMPAIGN-STYLE
EFFORT DESIGNED TO GOAD CONGRESS
INTO ACTION.
>> WE DON'T HAVE TO AGREE ON
EVERYTHING TO AGREE IT'S TIME TO
DO SOMETHING.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT TOOK
THAT MESSAGE TO MINNEAPOLIS, A
CITY THAT'S ALREADY IMPOSED
STRICTER BACKGROUND CHECKS ON
GUN BUYERS.
THE WHITE HOUSE PLAN CALLS FOR
THOSE CHECKS, A RENEWED BAN ON
ASSAULT-STYLE WEAPONS AND LIMITS
ON HIGH-CAPACITY MAGAZINES FOR
AMMUNITION.
>> THE ONLY WAY WE CAN REDUCE
GUN VIOLENCE IN THIS COUNTRY IS
IF THE AMERICAN PEOPLE DECIDE
IT'S IMPORTANT.
IF YOU DECIDE IT'S IMPORTANT.
IF PARENTS AND TEACHERS, POLICE
OFFICERS AND PASTORS, HUNTERS
AND SPORTSMEN, AMERICANS OF
EVERY BACKGROUND STAND UP AND
SAY, "THIS TIME IT'S GOT TO BE
DIFFERENT."
>> Ifill: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION HAS BEEN WORKING
TO BUILD ON PUBLIC OUTRAGE
SPARKED BY THE MASS SHOOTING IN
NEWTOWN CONNECTICUT THAT LEFT 20
CHILDREN AND SIX ADULTS DEAD.
? FOR PURPLE MOUNTAIN MAJESTY
AND A SUPER BOWL AD PAID FOR BY
MAYORS AGAINST ILLEGAL GUNS, A
GUN-CONTROL GROUP, FINANCED BY
NEW YORK MAYOR MICHAEL
BLOOMBERG, APPEALED FOR
BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR GUN
BUYERS.
IT FEATURED A CHILD NARRATOR AND
VIDEO OF NATIONAL RIFLE
ASSOCIATION LEADER WAYNE
LaPIERRE FROM 1999.
>> THE N.R.A. ONCE SUPPORTED
BACKGROUND CHECKS.
BUT LaPEER AIR REPEATED YESTERDAY
THE N.R.A. NO LONGER SUPPORTS
LaPEER AIR REPEATED YESTERDAY
UNIVERSAL CHECKS.
THE N.R.A. NO LONGER SUPPORTS
>> IT'S A FRAUD TO CALL IT
UNIVERSAL CHECKS.
UNIVERSAL.
>> Ifill: HE INSISTED MOST
AMERICANS WILL NOT BUY THE
PRESIDENT'S PUSH FOR NEW GUN
LAWS.
>> THEY DON'T WANT MORE LAWS
IMPOSED ON WHAT IS ONLY GOING TO
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA SAYS
ARE COMMON SENSORY
FORM NOT PUNITIVE ACTION NAMED
AT GUN
IN A RECENT INTERVIEW HE EVEN
SAID HE SCOOTS SKEET AT CAMP
DAVID.
AFTER SKEPTICS QUESTIONED THAT
CLAIM, THE WHITE HOUSE RELEASED
A PHOTO OVER THE WEEKEND OF HIM
FROM LAST AUGUST DOING JUST
THAT.
OF THE PRESIDENT IS EXPECTED TO
VISIT OTHER CITIES IN THE WEEKS
AHEAD PRESSING CONGRESS TO ACT
AND SOON.
THE GUN VIOLENCE DEBATE SHIFTS
DEPENDING ON WHERE YOU SIT, EVEN
IF YOU ARE IN LAW ENFORCEMENT.
OUR GUESTS ARE ONE EXAMPLE.
CHARLES RAMSEY IS POLICE
COMMISSIONER OF PHILADELPHIA,
THE NATION'S FOURTH LARGEST
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
AND BRUCE HARTMAN IS SHERIFF IN
THE RURAL COMMUNITY OF GILPIN
COUNTY, COLORADO, THE SECOND
SMALLEST COUNTY IN THE STATE.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
WE HEARD AT THE TOP OF THAT
TAPED PIECE THE PRESIDENT SAY,
"WITH DON'T HAVE TO AGREE ON
EVERYTHING TO AGREE THAT IT'S
TIME TO DO SOMETHING."
LET ME START WITH YOU, SHERIFF
HARTMAN, WHAT DOES DOING
SOMETHING MEAN TO YOU?
>> WELL, MY CONCERN IS THAT ALL
THE PLAYERS AREN'T INVITED TO
THE TABLE.
WE ALL RECOGNIZE THESE TRAGEDI
TRAGEDIES.
WE NEED TO DO SOMETHING TO TRY
AND PREVENT THEM.
THAT IS A COMMON GOAL.
BUT MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES SEEMS
TO BE AN UNDERLYING PROBLEM, AND
THAT HASN'T BEEN ADDRESSED TO
THE BEST OF MY KNOWLEDGE.
>> Ifill: COMMISSIONER RAMSEY,
WHAT IS DOING SOMETHING MEAN TO
YOU?
>> WELL ACTUALLY LET ME JUST SAY
THAT I AGREE WITH WHAT THE
SHERIFF JUST SAID.
MENTAL HEALTH IS A BIG PART OF
THIS ISSUE.
IT HAS BEEN DISCUSSEDDED AT
LEAST AT THE MEETINGS THAT I'VE
ATTENDED.
BUT STATUS CO- ISN'T ACCEPTABLE.
I MEAN, I CERTAINLY SUPPORT WHAT
THE PRESIDENT IS TRYING TO DO AS
IT RELATES TO THE ASSAULT
WEAPONS AND MAGAZINE CLIPS.
AND UNIVERSAL BACKGROUND CHECKS
WHICH I STILL DON'T UNDERSTAND
WHY ANYONE WOULD OBJECT TO A
UNIVERSAL BACKGROUND CHECK.
BUT, YOU KNOW, WE NEED TO ALSO
TIGHTEN SOME OF THESE LAWS OR AT
LEAST START TO ENFORCE THEM.
I MEAN, YOU KNOW, WE'VE GOT
PEOPLE NOW THAT GET CAUGHT WITH
GUNS AND VERY LITTLE HAPPENS TO
THEM.
THERE NEEDS TO BE VERY, VERY
STIFF SENTENCES FOR PEOPLE
CAUGHT CARRYING GUNS ILLEGALLY.
PURCHASERS NEED TO BE DEALT WITH
VERY HARSHLY.
WE NEED TO STRICTLY ENFORCE LAWS
THAT WE HAVE IN ADDITION TO SOME
OF THE NEW INITIATIVES.
>> Ifill: LET'S TALK TO SHERIFF
HARTMAN ABOUT THAT BECAUSE IT'S
IMPOSSIBLE FOR US TO SOLVE THE
PROBLEM HERE TONIGHT.
LET'S LOOK AT THE BACKGROUND
CHECKS WHERE THERE SEEMS TO BE
SOME AGREEMENT AT LEAST IN
WASHINGTON.
OUT WHERE YOU ARE, IS
SOMETHING WHICH IS IS FEASIBLE?
>> YES, IT IS.
WE HAVE PROVISIONS IN OUR STATE
LAW FOR BACKGROUND CHECKS AT GUN
SHOWS.
I CONCUR WITH THE CHIEF.
I BELIEVE THE ULTIMATE GOAL IS
TO KEEP GUNS OUT OF THE HANDS OF
CRIMINALS BUT...
>> Ifill: WHAT... I WAS JUST
GOING TO ASK YOU ABOUT A
TEN-ROUND LIMIT ON MAGAZINES?
>> I THINK THAT'S SOMETHING THAT
COULD BEAR DISCUSSION.
BUT SOMEBODY THAT TRAINS WELL
CAN CHANGE A MAGAZINE IN A
MATTER OF FRACTIONS OF SECONDS.
I DON'T KNOW IF THAT ADDRESSES
THE ENTIRE PROBLEM.
>> Ifill: COMMISSIONER RAMSEY,
THE PRESIDENT TALKED AGAIN TODAY
ABOUT AN ASSAULT WEAPONS BAN.
IS THAT SOMETHING THAT YOU THINK
IS DO-ABLE?
IS THAT SOMETHING THAT THE
PRESIDENT SHOULD BE FOCUSING ON?
OR ON MORE MINOR MOVES, I
SUPPOSE?
>> WELL, I MEAN, IS IT DO-ABLE?
CERTAINLY ANYTHING IS DO-ABLE
BUT THERE ARE AN AWFUL LOT OF
THEM OUT THERE NOW.
I THINK THE BILL THAT SENATOR
FEINSTEIN JUST RECENTLY
INTRODUCED GRANDFATHERS IN ALL
THE EXISTING ASSAULT TYPE OF
WEAPONS SO IT WILL BE A WHILE
BEFORE YOU SEE ANY IMPACT.
A MAJORITY OF HOMICIDES THAT WE
HAVE AT LEAST HERE IN
PHILADELPHIA AND FROM CHIEFS
AROUND THE COUNTRY THAT I'VE
SPOKEN TO, PREDOMINANTLY
HANDGUNS, SEMIAUTOMATIC
HANDGUNS, NINE MILLIMETRE BEING
THE ONE THAT WE RECOVER MOST
OFTEN.
SO THERE HAS TO BE A COMBINATION
OF THINGS.
THERE IS NO ONE THING THAT CAN
BE DONE THAT'S GOING TO HAVE AN
IMPACT.
THE BOTTOM LINE IS WE NEED
DECENT LAWS, REASONABLE LAWS IN
PLACE, MAYBE INCONVENIENT TO
SOME FOLKS THAT HAVE TO, YOU
KNOW, GO THROUGH BACKGROUND
CHECKS EVEN WITH PRIVATE SALES,
BUT IT'S SOMETHING THAT WE HAVE
TO DO TO MAKE SURE THAT THE GUNS
ARE NOT FALLING INTO THE WRONG
HANDS.
REPORTING A GUN LOST OR STOLEN,
TO ME, ANOTHER REASONABLE THING
THAT I BELIEVE WOULD DEFINITELY
HELP US IN LAW ENFORCEMENT.
AND THEN REALLY GOING AFTER THE
PEOPLE THAT ARE OUT HERE
COMMITTING CRIMES, USING A
HANDGUN, USING ASSAULT WEAPONS.
IT DOESN'T MATTER WHAT THEY USE.
ONCE THEY'RE CAUGHT AND
CONVICTED THEY NEED SERIOUS JAIL
TIME.
>> Ifill: WE STARTED THIS
CONVERSATION BY SAYING THINGS
ARE VERY DIFFERENT IN RURAL
JURISDICTIONS THAN IN URBAN.
WHAT KINDS OF NEEDS DO YOU
HAVE... THAT ARE DIFFERENT FROM
WHAT COMMISSIONER RAMSEY IS
TALKING ABOUT?
TRY, WE EXPECT THATAL PART OF
PEOPLE MAY HAVE A FIREARM IN
THEIR CAR IF WE STOP THEM.
THAT'S PART OF THE CULTURE AND
THE WAY THINGS ARE IN RURAL
AMERICA.
THAT DOESN'T MAKE THEM CRIMINAL
BY ANY MEANS.
BUT THAT IS ONE OF THE
DIFFERENCES I SUSPECT IN THE
MAJOR METROPOLITAN AREAS IF YOU
DO A TRAFFIC CONTACT AND THERE'S
A FIREARM IN THE CAR THAT THAT
IS SIGNIFICANT FACTOR TO THE
OFFICER.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU THIS,
SHERIFF.
DOES A FEDERAL LAW OR A FEDERAL
ENFORCEMENT, DOES IT HELP MAKE
YOUR JOB EASIER OR HARDER?
>> THAT'S A MIXED BAG.
THERE ARE SOME RESTRICTIONS.
THE PRINCE BILL OR PRINCE-CASE
WHICH WENT TO THE UNITED STATES
SUPREME COURT IN RELATION TO THE
ORIGINAL BRADY AMENDMENT FOUND
THAT LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT IS
NOT OBLIGATED OR CANNOT BE
COMPELLED TO ENFORCE FEDERAL
LAW.
SO THERE ARE SOMEGS
THAT NEED TO BE CONSIDERED ALL
ACROSS THE BOARD.
>> Ifill: COMMISSIONER RAMSEY,
WOULD YOU LIKE TO SEE MORE OR
LESS FEDERAL INVOLVEMENT?
>> I MEAN, I THINK IT HAS TO BE
A BALANCE.
YOU DON'T WANT TO TAKE AWAY TOO
MUCH FROM THE STATES.
AT THE SAME TIME, IF YOU DON'T
HAVE SOME FEDERAL LAWS IN PLACE
THEN ONCE THEY CAN RELATIVELY
STRICT LAWS, THE SURROUNDING
STATES DON'T.
SO YOU DON'T REALLY ACCOMPLISH A
WHOLE LOT.
I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
THE SHERIFF MENTIONED EARLIER --
AND I AGREE WHOLEHEARTEDLY
WITH -- I MEAN, YOU HAVE TO HEAR
FROM EVERYTHING.
... EVERYBODY.
IT IS A BIG DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
POLICING IN A RURAL JURISDICTION
VERSUS AN URBAN AREA LIKE I
HAVE.
AND SO WE NEED TO TAKE ALL THESE
THINGS INTO CONSIDERN.
THERE HAS GOT TO BE A SOLUTION
TO THIS PROBLEM THAT WE HAVE.
YOU KNOW, PEOPLE KEEP SAYING
MORE GUNS, MORE GUNS, MORE GUNS
BUT, YOU KNOW, THERE'S A YOUNG
MAN FROM VIRGINIA TECH WHO WAS
SHOT FOUR TIMES DURING THAT
PARTICULAR INCIDENT.
HE SAID SOMETHING THE OTHER DAY
THAT I THOUGHT REALLY IT
CERTAINLY GOT TO ME, AND THAT IS
THAT IF MORE GUNS MADE IT SAFER,
WE OUGHT TO BE THE SAFEST
COUNTRY ON THE PLANET BUT WE'RE
NOT.
SO WE'VE GOT TO BE ABLE TO SIT
DOWN AND FIGURE SOMETHING OUT.
BUT ALL VOICES NEED TO BE HEARD.
EVERYBODY NEEDS TO BE ABLE TO
GIVE A LITTLE BIT AND LET'S SEE
WHAT WE CAN COME WITH UP.
>> Ifill: ASSUMING THAT YOU BOTH
AGREE THE IDEA IS TO GET GUNS
OUT OF THE HANDS OF THE
CRIMINALS, LET ME START WITH
YOU.
SHERIFF HARTMAN, WHAT ELSE CAN
YOU AGREE ABOUT WITH THE
COMMISSIONER THAT YOU CAN
HELPING YOU DO YOUR JOB?
>> WELL, THERE'S A MULTITUDE OF
THINGS.
THE CONCERN THAT I BELIEVE A LOT
OF THE SHERIFFS IN THIS COUNTRY
HAVE, IN OUR ATTEMPT TO TAKE
CARE OF THIS PROBLEM WE HAVE,
THE RIGHTS OF SOME OF THE
CITIZENS COULD GET TRAMPLED ON.
THE VAST MAJORITY OF ASSAULT
WEAPONS -- AND I'M NOT SURE WHAT
THAT IS.
I'VE NEVER HEARD A GOOD
DEFINITION -- THERE'S TENS OF
THOUSANDS IN THE HANDS OF
PRIVATE CITIZENS THAT AREN'T
USED FOR CRIME.
AND SO I THINK A SWEEPING "YOU
CAN'T OWN THIS OR POSSESS THAT"
ISN'T THE ANSWER.
>> Ifill: COMMISSIONER RAMSEY?
THINK YOU HAVE TO TALK
ABOUT THINGS LIKE THIS.
YOU KNOW, THE PRESIDENT PUT
FORTH A PACKAGE.
THERE'S GOING TO BE A LOT OF
NEGOTIATION TO TAKE PLACE IN
CONGRESS.
EVERYONE VOICE'S NEEDS TO BE
HEARD.
THERE NEEDS TO BE SOMETHING
REASONABLE THAT COMES OUT OF
THIS.
BACKGROUND CHECKS, IF IT'S
LIMITING CERTAIN TYPES OF, YOU
KNOW, MAGAZINES OR WEAPONS WHICH
QUITE FRANKLY IF YOU LIMIT ONE
KIND OF WEAPON A MANUFACTURER
JUST FIGURES A WAY TO KIND OF
GET AROUND IT.
THE REAL KEY IS GETTING GUNS OUT
OF THE HANDS OF THE WRONG
PEOPLE.
WHETHER THEY'RE MENTALLY ILL,
WHETHER THEY'RE JUST FLAT-OUT
CRIMINALS.
WHATEVER THE SITUATION MIGHT BE.
NOW THE QUESTION IS HOW DO WE
BEST DO THAT AND STILL PROTECT
THE RIGHTS OF AMERICAN PEOPLE TO
OWN A GUN IF THEY WANT TO OWN A
GUN?
I THINK THERE'S GOT TO BE
SOMETHING HERE THAT WE CAN
REALLY WORK ON THAT'S
MEANINGFUL.
BUT IT CAN'T JUST BE STATUS CO.
YOU JUST CAN'T SAY NO TO
EVERYTHING.
WE HAVE TO DO SOMETHING OR WE'RE
GOING TO BE DEALING WITH THE
NEWTOWNS AND COLUMBINES AND
AURORAS OVER AND OVER AND OVER
AGAIN.
IT'S NOT GOING TO FIX ITSELF.
>> Ifill: COMMISSIONER CHARLES
RAMSEY OF PHILADELPHIA AND
SHERIFF BRUCE HARTMAN OF GILLPIN
COUNTY, COLORADO, THANK YOU BOTH
SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR, THE LIFE AND DEATH OF
AN AMERICAN SNIPER; THE RESCUE
OF ANCIENT DOCUMENTS IN MALI; A
CHECKLIST FOR GOOD TEACHERS; THE
IDENTIFICATION OF A BRITISH
MONARCH'S SKELETON; AND WRITER
GEORGE SAUNDERS.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S HARI SREENIVASAN.
F.B.I. AGENTS STORMED A BUNKER
IN ALABAMA RESCUING A
FIVE-YEAR-OLD BOY AFTER A
WEEK-LONG STAND-OFF.
OFFICIALS SAID AGENTS MOVE IN
AFTER TALKS WITH THE BOY'S
CAPTOR, 65-YEAR-OLD JIM DYKES
DETERIORATED.
HE WAS FOUND DEAD AFTER THE
OPERATION.
DYKES TOOK THE BOY HOSTAGE LAST
WEEK AFTER ATTACKING A SCHOOL
BUS AND KILLING THE DRIVER.
A SUICIDE BOMBER IN IRAQ STRUCK
AT AN ANTI-AL QAEDA MILITIA
TODAY, KILLING AT LEAST 22
PEOPLE AND WOUNDING 44.
IT HAPPENED IN THE TOWN OF TAJI,
12 MILES NORTH OF BAGHDAD.
THE BOMBER MINGLED WITH MEN WHO
WERE WAITING TO BE PAID.
THE ATTACK CAME A DAY AFTER 16
IRAQIS WERE KILLED AND AROUND 90
WOUNDED IN A SERIES OF BOMBINGS
IN KIRKUK.
A PAKISTANI GIRL SHOT BY THE
TALIBAN IS SPEAKING OUT FOR THE
FIRST TIME SINCE THE ATTACK THAT
NEARLY KILLED HER.
15-YEAR-OLD MALALA YOUSUFZAI WAS
SHOT IN THE HEAD LAST OCTOBER.
THAT SAME MONTH, SHE WAS
AIRLIFTED TO A HOSPITAL IN
BRITAIN.
IN A NEW VIDEO RELEASED TODAY--
BUT TAPED LAST MONTH-- SHE
INSISTED SHE WILL GO ON
ADVOCATING FOR THE EDUCATION OF
GIRLS.
>> I'M GETTING BETTER DAY BY
DAY.
IT'S JUST BECAUSE OF PEOPLE.
BECAUSE ALL THE PEOPLE, MEN,
WOMEN, CHILDREN, ALL OF THEM,
ALL OF THEM HAVE PRAYED FOR ME.
BECAUSE OF THESE PRAYERS, GOD
HAS GIVEN ME A SECOND LIFE.
THIS IS A NEW LIFE.
I WANT TO SERVE THE PEOPLE.
I WANT EVERY GIRL, EVERY CHILD
TO BE EDUCATED.
>> Sreenivasan: THE TEENAGER IS
EXPECTED TO REMAIN IN BRITAIN
FOR SOME TIME.
NEWLY INSTALLED SECRETARY OF
STATE JOHN KERRY HAD HIS FIRST
DAY ON THE JOB TODAY.
THE FORMER SENATOR ENTERED THE
STATE DEPARTMENT'S HARRY TRUMAN
BUILDING TO A BIG CROWD AND LOUD
CHEERS FROM STAFFERS.
HE SAID HE HOPES TO HELP MAKE
THE WORLD MORE PROSPEROUS AND
PEACEFUL.
WALL STREET HAD ITS WORST DAY OF
THE YEAR TO DATE, AMID NEW
CONCERNS ABOUT EUROPE AND ITS
DEBT LOAD.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
FELL BACK UNDER 14,000 LOSING
129 POINTS TO CLOSE AT 13,880.
THE NASDAQ DROPPED NEARLY 48
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 3131.
BALTIMORE RAVENS FANS CELEBRATED
THEIR SUPER BOWL WIN TODAY.
IT WAS THE SECOND TIME THE TEAM
HAS WON THE NFL CHAMPIONSHIP.
LAST NIGHT, A MASS PARTY FILLED
CITY STREETS AFTER THE RAVENS
DEFEATED THE SAN FRANCISCO
49ers, 34-31.
THERE'S AN OFFICIAL VICTORY
PARADE TOMORROW.
THE GAME WAS THE THIRD MOST-
WATCHED PROGRAM IN U.S.
TELEVISION HISTORY, DESPITE A
POWER OUTAGE THAT HALTED PLAY
FOR 34 MINUTES.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JEFF.
>> Brown: AND TO THE COMPELLING
STORY OF U.S. MILITARY VETERAN
CHRIS KYLE.
IRAQI INSURGENTS ONCE DUBBED
NAVY SEAL CHRIS KILE THE DEVIL
OF RAMADDI.
A MAN WHO GAINED A REPUTATION AS
ONE OF THE DEADLIEST SNIPERS IN
U.S. MILITARY HISTORY CREDITED
WITH MORE THAN 150 KILLS.
INSURGENTS EVEN PUT A
FIVE-FIGURE BOUNTY ON HIS HEAD
THAT WAS NEVER COLLECTED.
LAST YEAR KILE RECOUNTED HIS
LIFE AS A SHARP SHOOTER IN A
BEST-SELLING BOOK AMERICAN
SNIPER.
JUST TWO WEEKS AGO HE SPOKE OF
THE TROUBLE MANY AMERICAN TROOPS
HAVE COMING HOME AND READJUSTING
TO CIVILIAN LIFE.
>> YOU'RE VULNERABLE.
YOU'RE DOING IT FOR THE GREATER
GOOD.
ALL OF A SUDDEN YOU DON'T HAVE
AN IDENTITY.
>> Brown: ON SATURDAY
38-YEAR-OLD KILE AND A FRIEND
345-YEAR-OLD CHAD LITTLEFIELD
WERE SHOT DEAD AT A GUN RANGE
OUTSIDE FORT WORTH TEXAS.
>> MR. KILE WORKS WITH PEOPLE
THAT ARE SUFFERING FROM SOME
ISSUES THAT HAVE BEEN IN THE
MILITARY.
THIS SHOOTER IS POSSIBLY ONE OF
THOSE PEOPLE.
>> Brown: THE ALLEGED KILLER WAS
IDENTIFIED AS 25-YEAR-OLD EDDIE
RAY ROUTH WHO HAD SERVED IN IRAQ
AS A U.S. MARINE.
HE WAS APPREHENDED AND
CHARGEDDED WITH TWO COUNTS OF
CAPITAL MURDER.
MELISSA REPKO HAS BEEN REPORTING
ON THIS STORY FOR THE "DALLAS
MORNING NEWS."
SHE JOINS US NOW.
MELISSA, THANKS FOR JOINING US.
TELL US A BIT MORE ABOUT CHRIS
KILE'S OWN STORY.
HE GREW UP THERE IN TEXAS,
RIGHT?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
HE HE GREW UP IN TEXAS.
HE MENTIONED IN AN INTERVIEW
THAT HE DREAMED OF BEING A COW
BOY OR BECOMING A PERSON IN THE
MILITARY.
HE ENDED UP JOINING THE NAVY
SEAL AND BECOMING A VERY
SUCCESSFUL SNIPER.
HAD WAS DEEPLY CHRISTIANE IN HIS
FAITH.
HE WAS WELL LIKED BY HIS PEERS.
>> Brown: HE SERVED WITH GREAT
DISTINCTION.
HE CAME BACK AND WROTE THIS BEST
SELLING MEMOIR OF HIS TIME IN
IRAQ.
HE HAD HIS OWN PROBLEMS
ADJUSTING TO LIFE BACK A HOME.
>> YES, HE DID.
HE MENTIONED THAT WHEN HE GOT
BACK, IT WAS A JARRING
TRANSITION TO RETURN TO CIVILIAN
LIFE.
HE COULDN'T CONNECT AS MUCH WITH
PEOPLE WHO HADN'T EXPERIENCED
AND SEEN WHAT HE HAD SEEN DURING
HIS FOUR DEPLOYMENTS IN IRAQ
WHICH LED HIM TO EMPATHIZE WITH
FELLOW VETERANS AND WANT TO HELP
THEM.
>> Brown: TELL US ABOUT THAT
WORK.
SINCE 2009 I GATHER HE'S BEEN
QUITE ACTIVE IN TRYING TO WORK
WITH OTHER VETS.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
HE ACTUALLY STARTED A NONPROFIT
THAT PROVIDED AT-HOME EXERCISE
EQUIPMENT TO HELP THEM.
BUT HE HAD ALSO TAKEN THEM OUT
TO THE RANCH TO GO HUNTING OR
SHOOTING OR JUST GIVE THEM A
BREAK FROM SOME OF THE STRESSES
OF CIVILIAN LIFE ESPECIALLY
THOSE WITH POST TRAUMATIC STRESS
DISORDER.
>> Brown: TELL US A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT THAT WORK.
>> HE VOLUNTEERED ON SOME
WOUNDED WARRIOR RETREATS BUT HE
WOULD ALSO SPEND SOME TIME,
SOMETIMES HE WOULD BE CONTACTED
BY PEOPLE WHO KNEW STRUGGLING
VETERANS AND SO HE'D BEGIN TO
MENTALLOR THEM AND FORM A
RELATIONSHIP WITH THEM.
>> Brown: WHAT IS KNOWN AT THIS
POINT ABOUT HIS DEATH?
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED?
>> WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT THE
THREE MEN WERE ALL GOING TO THE
SHOOTING RANGE TOGETHER.
IT WAS ABOUT 50 MILES SOUTHWEST
OF FORT WORTH IN A VERY REMOTE
LOCATION.
THEY ARRIVED AT ABOUT 3:15.
THEIR DEATH IS BELIEVED TO HAVE
OCCURRED AROUND 3:30 ACCORDING
TO OFFICIALS.
AT SOME POINT IT'S BELIEVED THAT
THE MAN THEY WERE TRYING TO HELP
BY TAKING HIM OUT TO THE RANGE
ACTUALLY TURNED AND SHOT THEM.
>> Brown: WHAT IS KNOWN ABOUT
EDDIE RAY ROUTH?
>> WELL, WE KNOW THAT MAY HAVE
BEEN STRUGGLING WITH SOMETHING.
WE DON'T KNOW FOR SURE IF HE HAD
POST TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER.
JUST TODAY WE'VE DISCOVERED A
POLICE REPORT FROM LANCASTER
POLICE THAT INDICATES HIS
PARENTS HAD CONTACTED POLICE
AFTER AN ALTERCATION WHEN HE WAS
THREATENING TO KILL THEM AND TO
TAKE HIS OWN LIFE.
SO HE HAD HAD VIOLENT TENDENCIES
IN THE PAST.
AND IT'S UNCLEAR OFFICIALS
CANNOT CONFIRM THAT HE HAD POST
TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER BUT
WHEN THEY RESPONDED TO THAT
ALTERCATION HE TOLD THEM THAT HE
WAS STRUGGLING TO ADJUST AFTER
SERVING.
>> Brown: I HAD SEEN REPORTS OR
THERE ARE SOME REPORTS THAT
ROUTH'S MOTHER HAD ASKED KILE TO
WORK WITH HER SON.
YOU'RE SAYING THAT IT LOOKS LIKE
THAT MIGHT BE THE CASE?
WE JUST DON'T KNOW AT THIS
POINT.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THAT'S WHAT OFFICIALS ARE
SAYING.
THEY BELIEVE THAT HIS MOM, WHO
WAS A LONG-TIME SCHOOL TEACHER,
HEARD ABOUT THE WORK THAT KILE
WAS DOING AND SOMEHOW CONTACTED
HIM.
THAT'S HOW ALL THREE OF THEM
CONNECTED.
EVEN PRIOR TO THEM GOING ON THE
GUN RANGE, SOME NEIGHBORS SAID
THEY HAD SEEN KILE'S VEHICLE IN
THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT SEEMED LIKE THE TWO WERE
FORMING SOME KIND OF
RELATIONSHIP.
>> Brown: IT LOOKS AS THOUGH ONE
POSSIBILITY IS THAT KILE WAS
WORKING WITH ROUTH TO HELP HIM,
I GUESS.
>> EXACTLY.
THAT'S WHAT IT APPEARS TO BE.
THAT HE WAS TRYING TO HELP HIM
DURING A DIFFICULT TIME.
>> Brown: SO WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?
WHAT HAPPENS NOW?
>> WELL, CURRENTLY ROUTH IS
ACTUALLY IN THE JAIL.
HE IS BEING HELD ON A $3 MILLION
BOND.
LAST NIGHT WE HEARD FROM THE
SHERIFF THERE THAT THERE HAD
BEEN AN ALTERCATION WITH JAILERS
THAT LED HIM TO BE... THEY USED
A TASTER GUN ON HIM BECAUSE HE
SEEMED IN DISTRESS.
HE'S ACTUALLY ON SUICIDE WATCH
CURRENTLY.
HE'S GOING TO BE FACING TWO
COUNTS OF CAPITAL MURDER IN THE
CASE.
THEY'RE STILL TRYING TO FIGURE
OUT A MOTIVE.
>> Brown: AND WHAT ARE CHRIS
KILE'S FRIENDS SAYING ABOUT HIM
TODAY?
>> THEY'RE SAYING THAT IT IS...
THE ONES THAT I SPOKE TO ARE
JUST DEVASTATED BECAUSE HE HAD
SURVIVED SO MANY DANGERS DURING
HIS FOUR DEPLOYMENTS.
HE HAD BEEN IN HARM'S WAY SO
MANY TIMES AS A SNIPER.
HE WAS PURSUED BY INSURGENTS IN
IRAQ.
TO COME HOME AND WHAT APPEARS TO
BE FROM WHAT OFFICIALS ARE
SAYING AN ACT OF KINDNESS ENDED
UP ENDING HIS LIFE.
>> Brown: MELISSA REPKO OF THE
DALLAS MORNING NEWS, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: NEXT, THE BIG
ARCHAEOLOGICAL FIND THAT APPEARS
TO HAVE SOLVED A 500-YEAR
MYSTERY: WHATEVER HAPPENED TO
THE REMAINS OF RICHARD III?
SHAKESPEARE AS WELL AS HISTORY
TEXTS HAVE PORTRAYED HIM AS ONE
OF MEDIEVAL HISTORY'S GREAT
VILLAINS.
BUT SOME SCHOLARS HAVE SPENT
YEARS ATTEMPTING TO PROVE
OTHERWISE, STARTING WITH A
SEARCH FOR HIS GRAVE.
WE BEGIN WITH A REPORT FROM ASHA
TANNA OF INDEPENDENT TELEVISION
NEWS.
Reporter: WHEN ARCHEOLOGISTS
BEGAN SEARCHING THIS PARK THEY
DESCRIBED THE DIG AS A LONG
SHOT.
BUT JUST WEEKS INTO THE
EXCAVATION, THEY MADE THE MOST
EXTRAORDINARY DISCOVERY.
A BODY.
TODAY THE IDENTITY OF THAT
SKELETON WAS MADE OFFICIAL.
>> BEYOND A REASONABLE DOUBT THE
INDIVIDUAL EXHUMED ON SEPTEMBER
2012 IS INDEED RICHARD III, THE
LAST PLANTANNET KING OF ENGLAND.
>> Reporter: THE EXACT LOCATION
OF THE CHURCH, THOUGHT TO BE THE
LAST KNOWN RESTING PLACE OF THE
KING, HAD BEEN FORGOTTEN OVER
THE CENTURIES UNTIL THE DIG.
IT WAS THIS WOMAN WHO WAS
WRITING A SCREEN PLAY ABOUT THE
KING WHO INITIALLY FUNDED THE
PROJECT AND INTIS DATED THE
SEARCH.
>> THE FIRST TIME I WALKED HERE
I JUST HAD THE FEELING.
BUT THEN I CAME BACK A YEAR
LATER.
THERE WAS THE LETTER R RIGHT
WHERE I HAD THE FEELING THAT
RICHARD'S GRAVE WAS.
BELIEVE ME, I KNOW HOW MAD THAT
SOUNDS.
TO ME THAT JUST GAVE ME THE
PUSH.
>> Reporter: IT'S TAKEN MONTHS
OF ANALYSIS BY A HUGE TEAM OF
ACADEMICS TO SCIENTIFICALLY
PROVE BEYOND ALL REASONABLE
DOUBT THAT THIS IS RICHARD III.
D.N.A. WAS MATCHED FROM A LIVING
DAY DESCENDENT.
17th GENERATION FROM THE
FEMALE LINE.
>> WE KNOW THERE'S A SMALL PART
OF YOU THAT IS PART OF THE KING
ENGLAND.
IT'S DIFFICULT TO DIGEST, I
THINK.
>> Reporter: THE HUNCH BACK
MONARCH IS ACCUSED OF KILLING
HIS OWN NEPHEW THE PRINCES IN
THE TOWER TO CLAIM THE THRONE.
HIS REIGN FORMED PART OF THE DIE
KNOWS TICK STRUGGLE KNOWN AS THE
WAR OF THE ROSES.
FOR CENTURIES IT WAS WIDELY
BELIEVED HIS REMAINS WERE THROWN
INTO THE RIVER BUT THIS IS WHERE
HE WAS DISCOVERED.
HIS WELL PRESERVED SKELETON WAS
BURIED WITHOUT A COFFIN.
A COMBINATION OF MARKINGS ON THE
BONES AND GENETIC ANALYSIS
PROVED WHAT THE EXPERTS HAD
HOPED FOR.
HISTORY RECORDS THAT RICHARD
SUFFERED A BLOODY DEATH ON THE
BATTLEFIELD AND A C.T. SCAN
REVEALS TEN WOUNDS TO THE
SKELETON AND POTENTIALLY FATAL
INJURIES TO HIS HEAD.
HIS NAKED BODY WAS HASTILY
BURIED WITHOUT POMP ANSWER
MOANY.
NEXT YEAR HE'LL BE REENTERED AT
LESTER CATHEDRAL IN A BURIAL HIS
SUPPORTERS SAY HE'S BEEN WAITING
HUNDREDS OF YEARS FOR.
>> Ifill: FOR MORE ON THE
SIGNIFICANCE OF THIS HISTORIC
DISCOVERY, WE'RE JOINED BY JOHN
BURNS OF THE "NEW YORK TIMES."
JOHN BURNS, IT'S KIND OF HARD TO
LOOK AT THIS STORY AND NOT ASK
YOURSELF, HOW DOES ONE LOSE THE
BONES OF A MONARCH?
HOW DID IT COME THAT THEY DIDN'T
KNOW WHERE RICHARD III WAS?
>> WELL, HE WAS A VERY SPECIAL
MONARCH.
I KNOW AS A BOY WHO GREW UP IN
ENGLISH SCHOOLS HOW PROFOUNDLY
REVILED RICHARD III WAS.
SHAKESPEARE, OF COURSE, PLAYED A
VERY LARGE PART IN THAT WITH HIS
PLAY, RICHARD III, WHICH DMICTED
HIM AS ANYVILLE, MALICIOUS
MURDERING UNCLE OF THE PRINCES
IN THE TOWERS.
AS A HUNCH BACK WITH WITHERED
HANDS AND SO FORTH.
HE HAS FOR 500 YEARS BEEN
LARGELY SEEN IN THAT SORT OF
LIGHT BY THE PEOPLE IN THIS
COUNTRY.
THE FACT THAT HE DISAPPEARED HAD
SOMETHING TO DO THAT.
THERE WAS NO INSTINCT REALLY TO
GO AND FIND HIM.
THE PEOPLE WHO BURIED HIM WANTED
TO GET RID OF HIM AS QUICKLY AS
POSSIBLE BECAUSE THE TUDORS,
THAT IS TO SAY, THE PEOPLE WHO
DEFEATED HIM ON THE BATTLEFIELD
AT THE BATTLE OF BOSWORTH IN
1485 HAVE ABSOLUTELY NO INTEREST
IN GIVING HIM DUE HONOR AS A
KING.
>> Ifill: NOW THAT SCIENTISTS
AND ARCHEOLOGISTS HAVE HAD A
CHANCE TO EXAMINE THE REMAINS,
SHAKESPEARE DESCRIBED HIM AS A
HUNCH BACK.
THAT HE.
WAS HE A HUNCH BACK?
>> NO, HE WASN'T.
OF COURSE, VERY UNFORTUNATE
FEATURE OF THIS STORY IS THAT
THERE WAS IN MEDIEVAL TIMES AND
INDEED MORE RECENTLY THAN THAT
AN INSTINCT TO DEPICT PEOPLE
WITH PHYSICAL DEFORMITIES AS IN
SOME WAY MORALLY DEFORMED AS
WELL.
THANK GOODNESS WE'VE MOVED WAY
WAY BEYOND THAT NOW.
BUT I THINK THERE IS IS A
POSSIBILITY THAT THE DISCOVERY
OF THE SKELETON -- AND IT DOES
SEEM TO BE CONVINCING THAT THIS
IS RICHARD III -- WILL LAUNCH A
NEW ERA IN SCHOLARSHIP IN WHICH
THE SHAKESPEAREAN, IF YOU WILL,
VERSION OF RICHARD III WILL BE
RE-EXAMINED.
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO BELONG TO
AN ORGANIZATION CALLED THE
RICHARD IIII SOCIETY WHO SAY IN
FACT HE WAS ONE OF THE BEST
ENGLISH KINGS.
HE INTRODUCED A NUMBER OF THINGS
INCLUDING FAIRER TRIALS, FOR
EXAMPLE, INCLUDING RELAXATION OF
RESTRAINTS ON PRINTING PRESSES,
WHICH THEY SAY TOOK A VERY LONG
TIME AFTER HIS DEATH TO BECOME
REALITY AGAIN IN THIS COUNTRY.
>> Ifill: I KNOW THAT'S WHAT
RICHARD III'S ADMIRERS WOULD
LIKE TO DO: RETELL THE STORY.
HOW IS SIMPLY FINDING HIS
REMAINS GOING TO ALLOW PEOPLE TO
GET INTO THE BOTTOM OF WHAT HIS
MOTIVATIONS WERE OR WHAT HE DID,
WHAT HE DIDN'T DO, HOW EVIL HE
WAS OR WAS NOT?
>> WELL, THAT WAS A QUESTION
BEING ASKED INSISTENTLY TODAY AT
THE NEWS CONFERENCE IN THE CITY
OF LESTER.
THIS CONFIRMATION SKELETON WAS
RICHARD III'S WAS HELD THERE.
IT'S REALLY A HOPE MORE THAN A
CONVICTION ON THE PART OF THOSE
WHO BELIEVE THAT RICHARD WAS NOT
A MAN WHO DESERVED THE REVULSION
THAT HE HAS EARNED IN FIVE
VENTURIS SINCE.
IT'S THEIR HOPE THAT THERE WILL
BE NOW A NEW WAVE OF SCHOLARSHIP
AND POPULAR INTEREST IN THIS
DEAD KING THAT WILL LEAD TO A
REEXAMINATION OF THINGS WHICH
HAVE BEEN FOR TOO LONG CLOSED,
IF YOU WILL, IN THE MIND OF THE
GREAT BRITISH PUBLIC.
>> Ifill: I READ IN YOUR STORY
TODAY THAT IT WASN'T JUST THE
D.N.A. TRACE TO GO THE
DESCENDENTS OF RICHARD III BUT
SOMETHING CALLED RADIO CARBON
DATING WHICH ALLOWED HEM TO
FIGURE OUT THAT THESE WERE
REALLY HIS REMAINS.
IS THIS SOMETHING THEY COULD
HAVE FIGURED OUT 10 OR 20 YEARS
AGO?
WOULD WE HAVE HAD THE
TECHNOLOGY?
>> I THINK MODERN SCIENCE HAS
QUITE A LOT TO DO WITH THIS.
THE SCIENCE WAS PRETTY EXHAUST
TIVE.
THEY KNOW THAT IT WAS A MALE.
THEY KNOW THAT HE DIED 25 OR 30
YEARS, EITHER SIDE OF 1485 WHICH
IS IN FACT WHEN RICHARD II WAS
KILLED ON THE BATTLEFIELD.
THE SKELETON, OF COURSE HAS
REVEALED A GREAT DEAL ABOUT THE
CURVATURE OF THE SPINE.
THEY KNOW THAT THIS IS A PERSON
WHO, FOR EXAMPLE, HAD A VERY
HIGH-PROTEIN DIET WHICH WAS
RESERVED IN THOSE DAYS, IN THE
MIDDLE AGES, ONLY FOR THE MOST
WEALTHY AND THE POWERFUL.
AND THEN PROBABLY MOST
CONVINCING OTHER THAN THE D.N.A.
WAS THE WOUND INCLUDING A VERY
LARGE HOLE WE SAW AS WE WERE LED
PAST THE SKELETON RATHER REFUSE
RENGSALLY TODAY.
A VERY LARGE HOLE BEHIND WHAT
WOULD HAVE BEEN THE LEFT EAR OF
THE SKULL WHICH THE EXPERTS SAID
WAS CONSISTENT WITH A BLOW BY A
HALBERD, AN AX-LIKE MEDIEVAL
WEAPON WHICH IS CONSISTENT WITH
HIS DEATH.
THEY SAID HE WAS FELLED BY A
TREMENDOUS BLOW FROM A HALBERD.
I LEFT THERE PRETTY WELL
PERSUADED THAT THIS IS RICHARD
III, LESS PERSUADED THAT THE
SCHOLARSHIP WILL TURN UPSIDEDOWN
WHAT HAS BEEN THE COMMON PUBLIC
CONVICTION.
BUT I THINK WE'RE IN FOR A FEW
INTERESTING YEARS OF
SCHOLARSHIP.
WHO KNOWS WHERE THAT MAY LEAD.
>> Ifill: WHAT HAPPENS NOW TO
HIS REMAINS?
ARE THEY JUST REENTERED WHERE
THEY WERE FOUND OR DO THEY GO...
AREN'T MOST BRITISH MONARCHS AT
WESTMINSTER ABBEY OR TREATED
WITH SOME SORT OF SPECIAL
ATTENTION?
>> THEY ARE INDEED.
THAT'S WHAT MEMBERS OF RICHARD
III SOCIETY HAD HOPED FOR, THAT
HE WOULD JOIN OTHER ENGLISH
KINGS IN THAT ABBEY IN LONDON
ACROSS FROM THE PARLIAMENT WHERE
MANY ROYAL BURIALS AND INDEED
ROYAL WEDDINGS AS WE KNOW HAVE
BEEN HELD.
BUT IT HAS ALREADY BEEN DECIDED
THAT RICHARD WILL BE REENTERED
AT THE ANGLICAN CATHEDRAL IN
LESTER ABOUT 200 YARDS FROM
WHERE THE SKELETON WAS FOUND.
IT WILL BE DONE AT A MEMORIAL
SERVICE NOT A FUNERAL BECAUSE
HE'S ALREADY HAD A FUNERAL 500
YEARS AGO, A PRETTY HASTY ONE.
AND THAT WILL TAKE PLACE EARLY
NEXT YEAR AND WILL BE
ACCOMPANIED BY THE OPENING OF A
VISITORS' CENTER IN THE GROUNDS
OF THE CATHEDRAL WHICH WILL NO
DOUBT BE A MAJOR TOURIST DRAW.
>> Ifill: JOHN BURNS OF THE "NEW
YORK TIMES," THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> IT'S A PLEASURE, GWEN.
fill: YOU CAN READ MORE
>> Ifill: READ MORE ABOUT THE
D.N.A. ANALYSIS THAT HELPED TO
UNCOVER THIS MYSTERY ON OUR
SCIENCE PAGE.
>> Brown: FINALLY TONIGHT, SHORT
>> Brown: NOW, TO ANOTHER IN OUR
SERIES ON THE NATION'S HIGH
SCHOOL DROPOUT CRISIS, TOLD THIS
TIME THROUGH A DIFFERENT LENS:
GOOD TEACHERS CAN HELP KEEP KIDS
IN SCHOOL, BUT HOW CAN SCHOOLS
HOLD ON TO THEIR TOP TEACHERS?
HARI IS BACK WITH A REPORT FOR
OUR "AMERICAN GRADUATE" PROJECT.
>> IT'S A SIMPLE QUESTION AT THE
CENTER OF ALMOST ANY DISCUSSION
ON EDUCATION REFORM.
WHAT MAKES A GOOD TEACHER?
BUT THE ANSWERS ARE MANY AND
OFTEN COMPLEX, AND THE QUESTION
CAN LEAD TO HIGHLY POLARIZING
DEBATES OVER EXACTLY HOW AND HOW
OFTEN TEACHERS SHOULD BE
EVALUATED ON THEIR JOB
PERFORMANCE.
AT THE FRONT LINES OF THIS
DEBATE ARE CHARTER SCHOOLS.
THE FASTEST-GROWING SECTOR OF
AMERICAN EDUCATION.
WITH TWO MILLION STUDENTS NOW
ENROLLED IN MORE THAN 5,000 SUCH
INSTITUTIONS ACROSS THE U.S.
BRIDGEPORT ACADEMY MIDDLE SCHOOL
IN BRIDGEPORT CONNECTICUT IS OF.
LIKE TRADITIONAL PUBLIC SCHOOLS,
IT RECEIVES PER-PUPIL FUNDS FROM
THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT.
BUT IT IS ALLOWED TO OPERATE
INDEPENDENTLY FROM THE LOCAL
DISTRICT AND USES A BLIND
LOTTERY FOR ENROLLMENT.
THE SCHOOL IS PART OF THE LARGER
NONPROFIT ACHIEVEMENT FIRST
NETWORK OF 22 CHARTERS ALONG THE
EAST COAST SERVING MAINLY
LOW-INCOME MINORITY STUDENTS.
>> WHAT IS THE WORD FOR A GAS...
Reporter: AT BRIDGEPORT
ACADEMY MIDDLE SCHOOL THE
ULTIMATE GOAL IS TO CLOSE THE
SO-CALLED ACHIEVEMENT GAP
BETWEEN RICH AND POOR STUDENTS.
ITS PRINCIPAL IS MORGAN BARTH.
>> BRIDGEPORT IS ON THE BOTTOM
END OF CONNECTICUT WHICH HAS THE
BIGGEST ACHIEVEMENT GAP IN THE
COUNTRY.
OUR KIDS ARE GREAT.
THEY COME TO SCHOOL WITH SOME
REALLY HEART-BREAKING DEFICITS
IN THEIR ACADEMIC SKILLS.
ON AVERAGE A FIFTH GRADER COMES
TO OUR SCHOOL AT LEAST TWO OR
THREE GRADE LEVELS BEHIND.
>> Reporter: THESE KINDS OF
EDUCATIONAL DEFICITS HAVE CAUSED
LINGERING PROBLEMS FOR A CITY
WHERE ONE-THIRD OF ALL STUDENTS
FAIL TO GRADUATE ON TIME.
>> WE HAVE TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
ARE...
>> Reporter: THAT HAS LED TO A
CONCENTRATED EFFORT BY
BRIDGEPORT ACADEMY MIDDLE
SCHOOL.
LIKE ALL OUR ACHIEVEMENT FIRST
SCHOOLS TO PLACE AND KEEP GREAT
TEACHERS IN THE CLASSROOM.
IN ORDER TO IDENTIFY WHO THOSE
GREAT TEACHERS ARE, ACHIEVEMENT
FIRST CEO SAYS THE ORGANIZATION
HAS DEVELOPED A COMPREHENSIVE
CHECKLIST TO EVALUATE ITS
TEACHERS.
>> IN THE PAST TEACHER
EVALUATION HAS FOCUSED ON
OBSERVATIONS WHICH AT THEIR
WORST BECOME STAGED DOG AND PONY
SHOW EXPERIENCES THAT DON'T
ACTUALLY TELL YOU A LOT ABOUT
TEACHERS' EFFECTIVENESS OR MORE
IMPORTANTLY HOW THEY NEED TO
IMPROVE.
>> I WANT US NOW TO WALK QUICKLY
THROUGH THE SCHOOL WORK FOR THE
WHOLE OBSERVATION.
>> Reporter: AT THIS SCHOOL
TEACHER OBSERVATIONS ARE
DETAILED BI-WEEKLY AND DISCUSSED
AT LENGTH IN REGULAR COACHING
SESSIONS.
>> YOU COULD HAVE MOVED A LITTLE
BIT MORE EFFICIENTLY THROUGH
JUST THE PROCESS ITSELF.
>> Reporter: PERHAPS
SURPRISINGLY THEY'RE ALSO
WELCOME HERE.
>> I THOUGHT MY PACING WAS OFF A
LITTLE BHIT BIT.
I THOUGHT THERE WERE A COUPLE
TIMES WHERE I WASN'T QUITE THERE
AS I NORMALLY AM.
>> Reporter: JUDY IS A FIFTH
GRADE MATH TEACHER AND WAS A
VETERAN IN THE NEARBY NEW HAVEN
PUBLIC SCHOOL DISTRICT UNTIL
COMING TO ACHIEVEMENT FIRST FIVE
YEARS AGO.
>> THE TEACHING MODEL AT
ACHIEVEMENT FIRST IS DIFFERENT
THAN THE TEACHING MODEL AT MOST
OTHER SCHOOLS IN TERMS OF THE
WAY THE LESSONS ARE SET UP.
I FOUND IT WAS EXTREMELY
BENEFICIAL INITIALLY BECAUSE I
WAS GETTING IMMEDIATE FEEDBACK.
>> Reporter: TEACHERS HERE FIND
OUT EVERY DAY HOW EFFECTIVELY
THEY'VE TAUGHT A LESSON WITH
SHORT QUIZZES CALLED EXIT
TICKETS.
>> FOR YOUR EXIT TICKET YOU HAVE
FOUR PROBLEMS.
>> Reporter: STUDENTS ARE
REQUIRED TO TAKE ONE AT THE END
OF EACH CLASS TO MEASURE THEIR
LEVEL OF COMPREHENSION.
BUT TEST SCORES AND THE RESULTS
OF CLASSROOM OBSERVATIONS ARE
NOT THE ONLY FACTORS HERE THAT
DETERMINE THE QUALITY OF A
TEACHER.
>> WE HAVE PARENTS, STUDENT,
PEER AND PRINCIPAL SURVEYS.
SO THE TEACHER IS REALLY GETTING
A WHOLE 360 TAKE ON WHAT THEY'RE
DOING WELL AND WHAT THEY NEED TO
IMPROVE.
>> DOES THIS MODEL EXPLAIN IT?
Reporter: A LARGE PART OF THE
ACHIEVEMENT FIRST PLAN TO KEEP
EXCELLENT TEACHERS AND THOSE
WITH POTENTIAL TO BECOME GREAT
IS THE TEACHER CAREER PATHWAY.
IT'S A MODEL DESIGNED TO PLACE
CLASSROOM EDUCATORS INTO FIVE
CAREER STAGES DEPENDING ON
EXPERIENCE AND CLASSROOM
EFFECTIVENESS.
BEGINNING AT INTERN AND
CONCLUDING AT MASTER TEACHER.
REACHING THE FIFTH AND FINAL
STAGE WOULD BRING A SIGNIFICANT
PAY INCREASE ALTHOUGH EXACT
COMPENSATION FIGURES ARE STILL
BEING WORKED OUT.
THE GOAL IS TO INCENTIVIZE
TEACHERS TO STAY IN THE
CLASSROOM RATHER THAN MOVE
TOWARD ADMINISTRATIVE JOBS WITH
HIGHER SALARIES.
>> WE HAVE GOT TO IMPROVE
STUDENT OUTCOMES.
IN ORDER TO DO THAT, WE'VE GOT
TO ATTRACT AND RETAIN VERY
TALENTED PEOPLE.
AS OUR TEACHERS, AT OUR
INTERNATIONAL COMPETITORS HAVE
DONE.
AND WE THINK A BIG PART OF THAT
IS SAYING, YOU CAN MAKE THIS A
MEANINGFUL, REWARDING CAREER.
>> Reporter: THAT'S SOMETHING
JUDY ANDREWS FINDS APPEALING
ABOUT HOW THE MODEL WAS
DESIGNED.
>> I'M NOT A FIRST-YEAR OR
SECOND-YEAR TEACHER OBVIOUSLY.
IN A TRADITIONAL EVALUATION
SYSTEM ONCE YOU GET TO A CERTAIN
POINT, WHETHER OR NOT YOU GET
ANY TYPE OF FINANCIAL
RECOGNITION IS BASED SOLELY ON
THE NUMBER OF YEARS.
AFTER A WHILE THAT GETS A LITTLE
HARD TO TAKE.
>> Reporter: RETAINING TEACHERS
IS SOMETHING CHARTERS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY HAVE STRUGGLE TO DO.
IN FACT A RECENT STUDY BY
VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY FOUND THAT
THE ODDS OF A CHARTER SCHOOL
TEACHER MOVING TO ANOTHER SCHOOL
WERE 76% GREATER THAN A TEACHER
AT A TRADITIONAL PUBLIC SCHOOL.
RACHAEL CURTIS IS A FORMER
EDUCATOR-TURNED-CONSULTANT WHO
RECENTLY ANALYZED ACHIEVEMENT
FIRST FOR THE INSTITUTE.
SHE SAID THE NETWORK HAS HAD
BUY-IN ON ITS EVALUATION SYSTEM
FROM ITS TEACHERS WHO ARE ON
ONE-YEAR CONTRACTS WITHOUT THE
POSSIBILITY OF TENURE BECAUSE
THEY WERE CONSULTED DURING THE
EVALUATION MODEL'S DEVELOPMENT.
>> THE BENEFIT OF BEING THE SIZE
THAT THEY ARE IS THAT THERE'S
BEEN AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF
TEACHER ENGAGEMENT AROUND THE
DESIGN.
SO I DOUBT THAT THERE A LOT OF
TEACHER AT ACHIEVEMENT FIRST WHO
FEEL LIKE THIS IS BEING DONE TO
THEM.
THAT'S A MUCH MORE COMMON
PHENOMENON IN A LARGE URBAN
DISTRICT IN PARTICULAR WHERE YOU
CAN'T POSSIBLY HAVE EVERY
TEACHER WEIGH IN ON HOW THEY
THINK YOU SHOULD BE GOING ABOUT
THIS.
>> Reporter: THE NETWORK IS
PAYING FOR THE TEACHER CAREER
PATHWAY IN PART WITH A $6
MILLION FEDERAL GRANT.
THAT FINANCIALALITY RACHAEL
CURTIS SAYS WOULD MAKE IT
DIFFICULT TO IMPLEMENT
ELSEWHERE.
IT'S A MODEL THAT MANY SCHOOL
DISTRICTS COULD DRAW LESSONS
FROM.
>> I THINK THERE'S A HUGE
RESOURCE ALLOCATION ISSUE,
RIGHT?
WHAT'S NOT CLEAR IS, IS IT THAT
THEY JUST HAVE MORE RESOURCES OR
IS IT THAT THEY USE THE
RESOURCES IN VERY DIFFERENT
WAYS?
IF YOU GO INTO AN ACHIEVEMENT
FIRST SCHOOL, YOU WILL SEE FAR
FEWER ADMINISTRATORS THAN IN
MOST TRADITIONAL DISTRICT
SCHOOLS.
THE CHOICES THEY MAKE ABOUT HOW
THEY DEPLOY PEOPLE I THINK IS
SOMETHING THAT WE ALL COULD
LEARN A LOT FROM.
>> Reporter: ACHIEVEMENT FIRST
SAYS THE EVALUATION PROCESS AND
TEACHER CAREER PATHWAY REMAIN A
WORK IN PROGRESS.
BUT THE PRINCIPAL OF BRIDGEPORT
ACADEMY MIDDLE SCHOOL MORGAN
BARTH SAYS HE'S SEEING
SIGNIFICANT GAINS IN THE
CLASSROOM.
>> WE ARE REGULARLY GETTING
RESULTS THAT SHOW THAT WE HAVE
FIFTH AND SIXTH GRADERS GROWING
TWO, TWO-AND-A-HALF GRADE LEVELS
A YEAR AND REALLY CATCHING UP.
WE'RE HAVING 7th AND 8th
GRADERS BEAT THE STATE AVERAGE.
>> Reporter: DESPITE THE FACT
THAT THERE ARE MIXED RESULTS
FROM NATIONAL STUDIES ON WHETHER
CHARTER SCHOOLS ARE ACADEMICALLY
SUPERIOR TO THEIR TRADITIONAL
COUNTERPARENTS, ACHIEVEMENT
IRST SAYS THEY'RE MAKING
PROGRESS IN LEVELING THE PLAYING
FIELD BETWEEN WEALTHY AND
DISADVANTAGED STUDENTS,
IMPORTANT IN A CITY WHERE 40% OF
ALL CHILDREN LIVE BELOW THE
FEDERAL POVERTY LINE.
>> Brown: THERE'S MUCH MORE
ONLINE INCLUDING A VIDEO ABOUT
BRIDGEPORT ACADEMY'S STRICT
RULES, UNIFORMS AND COLLEGE
EXPECTATIONS.
AND A TIMELINE OF TEACHER
EVALUATION CONTROVERSIES, FROM
THE LAUNCH OF "RACE TO THE TOP"
TO LAST YEAR'S CHICAGO TEACHERS'
UNION STRIKE AND MORE.
"AMERICAN GRADUATE" IS A PUBLIC
MEDIA INITIATIVE FUNDED BY THE
CORPORATION FOR PUBLIC
BROADCASTING.
>> Ifill: AND WE TURN NOW TO THE
WEST AFRICAN NATION OF MALI,
WHERE THE FRENCH MILITARY
CONTINUES ITS PURSUIT OF
ISLAMISTS, AMID NEW INDICATIONS
THAT MANY OF TIMBUKTU'S ANCIENT
MANUSCRIPTS HAVE BEEN SAVED.
MARGARET WARNER HAS OUR STORY.
>> Warner: FRENCH WARPLANES
STRUCK EVER DEEPER INTO THE
DESERT OF NORTHERN MALI TODAY,
ATTACKING REMOTE CAMPS USED BY
ISLAMMIST INSURGENTS TIED TO AL
QAEDA.
IN THE LAST WEEK, FRENCH
PARA-TROOPERS AND TARGETED AIR
STRIKES ROUTED ISLAM I HAVES
FROM THE KEY NORTHERN CITIES OF
TIMBUKTU.
NOW THE AIR CAMPAIGN IS FOCUSED
ON FUEL DEPOTS, TRAINING CAMPS
AND THE REBELS' SAHARAN HIDEOUTS
FARTHER NORTH.
IN PARIS TODAY, VICE PRESIDENT
JOE BIDEN PRAISED PRESIDENT
HOLE-AND-E'S DECISION TO
INTERVENE.
>> LET ME SAY ON BEHALF O
PRESIDENT AND THE PEOPLE OF THE
UNITED STATES WE APPLAUD YOUR
DECISIVENESS, AND I MIGHT ADD
THE INCREDIBLE COMPETENCE AND
CAPABILITY OF YOUR FRENCH
MILITARY FORCES.
>> Warner: ON SATURDAY THE
FRENCH PRESIDENT VISITED
TIMBUKTU AND RECEIVED A HERO'S
WELCOME.
HE WAS JOINED BY THE HEAD OF THE
U.N. CULTURAL HERITAGE AGENCY
UNESCO.
TOGETHER THEY TOURED THE ANCIENT
CITY'S FAMED SITES INCLUDING ITS
GRAND MOSQUE BUILT IN THE
14th CENTURY AND THIS
LIBRARY ONCE FILLED WITH
PRICELESS CENTURIES OLD
MANUSCRIPTS.
THE MANUSCRIPTS WERE INITIALLY
FEARED TO HAVE BEEN BURNED BUT
THE FAST MAJORITY WERE SAFED.
>> WHAT WE DID WAS TO LIBERATE
AND SURE THAT CULTURAL PLACES
BUT ALSO HERITAGE ELEMENTS LIKE
THE MANUSCRIPTS ARE PROTECTED
AND FACE GUARDED.
>> Warner: NOT AS FORTUNATE WERE
THESE MEDIEVAL MAASLY YUMS
RECOGNIZED AS WORLD TREASURES.
THE ISLAMISTS DEEMED THEM EYE
TOLL TRUSS SHRINES.
LAST JULY THEY HACKED MANY OF
THEM INTO RUBBLE.
TODAY REBELS OPPOSED TO THE
ISLAMISTS AND THE GOVERNMENT
CLAIM THEY CAPTURED THE TOP
ISLAMIST INSURGENT WHO HAD
IMPOSED STRICT SHARIA LAW IN
TIMBUKTU.
MEANWHILE THE FRENCH MILITARY
SAID ITS 600 TROOPS NOW
PATROLLING THE CITY PLAN TO TURN
IT OVER TO MALLIAN FORCES LATER
THIS WEEK.
FOR MORE ON THE STATE OF
TIMBUKTU'S ANCIENT MANUSCRIPTS
AND SITES, I'M JOINED BY LAZARE
ELOUNDO ASSOMO, CHIEF OF
UNESCO'S AFRICA UNIT IN PARIS.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING IT US.
I'M WONDERING WHAT YOU'VE HEARD
ABOUT YOUR CHIEF'S MISSION THERE
TO TIMBUKTU WITH PRESIDENT
HOLLANDE.
HAS SHE BEEN ABLE TO MAKE A
PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT OF THE
DAMAGE TO THESE SITES AND THESE
MANUSCRIPTS?
>> SHE, OF COURSE, BEING THERE
HAD THE OPPORTUNITY TO WITNESS
FOR HERSELF THE EXTENT OF THE
DAMAGE.
YOU'VE SEEN HER VISITING ONE OF
THE ANCIENT MOSQUES WHICH WAS
BUILT IN THE 14th CENTURY
BUT ALSO SEEING THE DAMAGED
MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INSTITUTE.
SHE ALSO HAD OPPORTUNITY TO TOUR
THE OLD TOWN.
SHE HAS A LOT AND SHE'S EVEN
MORE CONVINCED TODAY THAN BEFORE
THAT THE ROLE OF UNESCO IS
ABSOLUTELY IMPORTANT.
>> Warner: NOW, WHAT ABOUT THE
MANUSCRIPTS?
I GATHER THIS LIBRARY HELD ABOUT
40,000 OF THEM.
WHAT PERCENTAGE OF THEM WERE
DESTROYED OR BURNED IN SOME WAY?
AND WHAT PERCENTAGE WERE HID
AWAY?
>> EVERYBODY KNOWS THAT IN
TIMBUKTU MANUSCRIPTS ARE HELD BY
DIFFERENT GROUPS.
YOU HAVE THE PUBLIC LIBRARY, OF
COURSE, WHICH WAS THE INSTITUTE.
YOU ALSO HAVE PRIVATE LIBRARIANS
WHO ARE HAVING SOME OF THEM.
BUT ALSO THE FAMILIES.
IT MAKES ALMOST A TOTAL OF
300,000 MANUSCRIPTS AND EVEN
MORE.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT MANUSCRIPTS
THAT WERE BURNED BY THE ISLAMIST
GROUP.
THIS FACT OF TORCHING AND
BURNING THE MANUSCRIPT IS
SOMETHING WHICH WE CONSIDER
UNACCEPTABLE BECAUSE SOME OF
THIS MANUSCRIPT DATES FROM THE
12th CENTURY.
IF SOME OF THEM WERE AMONG TO
BURN MAN SCRIPTS IT'S A GREAT
LOSS FOR HUMANITY.
WHAT ABOUT THE MAASLY UPS?
FROM THE VIDEOS WE'VE SEEN THE
ONES THAT WERE HACKED BACK LAST
JULY, HOW CAN UNESCO GO ABOUT
REBUILDING THOSE?
>> WHAT THE COMMUNITY USED TO DO
WAS TO GO TO THESE MAASLY YUMS
TO POUR SHIP.
AFTER THE MOSQUE MONDAY AND
ALSO ON FRIDAY.
SO IT HAS BEEN FOR THE PAST 100
YEARS SOMETHING THEY'VE BEEN
DOING.
THE FACT THAT THEY HAVE BEEN
DESTROYED WAS A WAY OF STOPPING
THEM FOR PRACTICING THEIR
CULTURE.
TODAY WE... IT'S A LIVING
HERITAGE.
WITHOUT IT, THE COMMUNITY CANNOT
MOVE FORWARD.
IT'S ABOUT THEIR FUTURE, OF
COURSE.
IT'S ABOUT REBUILDING THEIR
DIGNITY.
>> Warner: YOU STILL HAVE WAR
RAGING IN MALI OR CONFLICT AT
LEAST.
HOW CONFIDENT ARE YOU THAT
TIMBUKTU IS NOW SAFE FROM A
REPEAT OF WHAT HAPPENED?
>> WELL, IT IS OUR HOPE THAT THE
SITUATION WILL GET BETTER AND
BER, NORMAL AND NORMAL.
ALSO I THINK IT'S UNESCO'S
RESPONSIBILITY TO RESPOND TO THE
CALL FROM THE PEOPLE AND THE
MALIAN PEOPLE, THE COMMUNITIES
EXPECT US TO START HELPING AND
ASSISTING THEM, RESTORE THEIR
HERITAGE AS SOON ASIBLE.
WE WILL DO IT.
>> Warner: FROM UNESCO IN PARIS,
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: FINALLY TONIGHT, SHORT
STORY WRITERS DON'T OFTEN
RECEIVE A LOT OF ATTENTION, BUT
OF LATE, GEORGE SAUNDERS HAS
BEEN GETTING PLENTY.
SAUNDERS, A MacARTHUR FELLOW WHO
TEACHES AT SYRACUSE UNIVERSITY,
IS AN ACCLAIMED MASTER OF THE
GENRE, KNOWN FOR HIS BITING
SOCIAL SATIRE AND DEEPLY FELT
TAKES ON CONTEMPORARY AMERICAN
LIFE.
IN HIS NEW COLLECTION HE WRITES
OF A TEENAGER WHO WITNESSES THE
ATTEMPTED KIDNAPPING OF A
NEIGHBOR AND MUST DECIDE WHETHER
TO INTERVENE; A WAR-DAMAGED
COMBAT VETERAN WHO RETURNS TO A
SUDDENLY UNFAMILIAR HOME TOWN; A
MAN WITH CANCER WHO TAKES ACTION
TO SPARE HIS FAMILY THE PAIN,
AND THEN FINDS HIS OWN KIND OF
SALVATION.
THE BOOK IS TITLED "TENTH OF
DECEMBER."
GEORGE SAUNDERS JOINED US FOR A
TALK IN OUR STUDIO RECENTLY.
WELCOME TO YOU.
>> NICE TO BE HERE.
Brown: I THINK I WANT TO
START BY ASKING ABOUT THE GENRE
OF SHORT STORY.
IT'S SOMETHING WE DON'T TALK
MUCH ABOUT.
IT GETS LITTLE ATTENTION.
WHY IS IT THE FORM FOR YOU?
>> FOR ME IT'S ALMOST NEURO
LOGICAL.
I UNDERSTAND WHAT SOMETHING
SHORT SHOULD BE LIKE.
I UNDERSTAND BEAUTY IN THAT
FORM.
IF I START EXTENDING SOMEHOW I
LOSE MY BEARINGS.
IT MIGHT BE LIKE IN SPORTS WHERE
THERE ARE FAST TWITCH MUSSES AND
SLOW SWITCH MUSCLES.
MY STORIES I CAN UNDERSTAND THEM
AS A LITTLE TOY YOU WIND UP AND
YOU PUT IT UNDER ON THE FLOOR
AND IT GOES UNDER THE COUCH.
>> Brown: A SHORT STORY
COMPRESSES THE NARRATIVE,
COMPRESSES THE STORY.
YOU'RE KNOWN FOR COMPRESSION OF
LANGUAGE.
YOU LEAVE A LOT OUT.
>> AS MUCH AS I CAN.
Brown: REALLY?
USUALLY I'LL GET MAYBE TWO
THIRDS MORE THAN I NEED AND CUT
BACK.
THE ASSUMPTION THERE IS THAT I
CAN BE MORE EFFICIENT, I'M
ACTUALLY BEING MORE RESPECTFUL
TO THE READER WHICH THEN IMPLIES
A GREATER INTIMACY WITH THE
READER.
>> Brown: THESE PIECES ARE
WORKED OVER, WORKED AND WORKD
AND WORKED.
>> THERE'S A PIECE I STARTED IN
'98 AND JUST FINISHED LAST YEAR.
>> Brown: THAT'S A LOT OF WORK.
MAYBE SLIGHTLY DERANGED.
Brown: SPEAKING OF DERANGED
PEOPLE SPEAK OF YOUR SUBJECTS AS
KIND OF WHAMMY CONSUMERISM OR
SOMETIMES OR THE ABSURDITY OF
CORPORATE LIFE OR THE SOCIAL
RELATIONS.
THAT COMES THROUGH LOT OF THE
STORIES FOR INDIVIDUALS,
FAMILIES, HAVE'S AND HAVE-NOT'S
IN TODAY'S SOCIETY.
DO YOU FEEL YOU HAVE A SUBJECT?
IS THERE SOMETHING YOU'RE TRYING
TO TELL?
>> I DO BUT MY APPROACH IS MUCH
MORE INTUITIVE.
WHAT I FIND USUALLY IS I HAVE A
SUBJECT AND I DO THAT, IT TENDS
TO BE A LITTLE DULL.
SO FOR ME THE APPROACH HAS
BECOME TO GO INTO A STORY NOT
REALLY SURE WHAT I WANT TO SAY.
TRYING TO FIND SOME LITTLE SEED
CRYSTAL, A SENTENCE OR AN I AM
AND/OR AN IDEA AND AS MUCH AS
POSSIBLE DIVEST MYSELF OF ANY
DEEP IDEAS ABOUT IT.
BY THIS PROCESS OF REVISION IT
STARTS TO GET MEANINGFUL AS YOU
GO.
THOSE MEANINGS TEND TO BE MORE
EMOTIONAL AND INTENSE THAN THE
ONES YOU PLAN IN ADVANCE.
IT'S AN ELABORATE EXERCISE IN
BEING COMFORTA W
ELEMENT OF MYSTERY OR SORT OF AN
UNKNOWN QUALITY.
>> Brown: THESE STORIES THEY DO
LOOK AT... WELL, THERE'S ONE
HOME ABOUT A SOLDIER COMING
HOME.
THERE'S THE TITLE STORY IS A MAN
LEARNING THAT HE'S DYING AND NOT
WANTING TO PUT THAT ON HIS
FAMILY.
THESE ARE REAL-LIFE THINGS.
THE CORPORATE CULTURE.
I MEAN, WHERE DO THESE THINGS
COME FROM?
>> WELL, I'M REALLY INTERESTED
IN THOSE THINGS THAT AS IDEAS.
I STARTED OUT IN ENGINEERING.
I WAS A GEO PHYSICAL ENGINEER.
THROUGHOUT THE COURSE OF MY LIFE
I'VE DONE A LOT OF STRANGE JOBS.
THE EFFECT HAS BEEN TO MAKELY
KIND OF THINK A LITTLE MORE
SKEPTICALLY ABOUT OUR CAPITALIST
SOCIETY.
SO THESE STORIES IN ONE WAY ARE
A WAY OF KIND OF JUST SUGGESTING
THAT THERE MIGHT BE SORT OF AN
UNDERSIDE TO IT.
IN FACT, ON RESTRAINED
CAPITALISM IS QUITE CRUEL.
THE COST IS ON THE INDIVIDUAL
HUMAN ON HIS OR HER GRACE.
THAT'S SORT OF A SUB IDEA.
>> Brown: WHAT'S INTERESTING IS,
I MEAN, YOU COULD APPROACH THOSE
THINGS POLITICAL ANALYST OR AS A
JOURNALIST.
YOU'RE DOING IT AS A WRITER BUT
ALSO A WRITER WHO USES A LOT OF
HUMOR.
IT'S DARK HUMOR.
>> I THINK IF YOU, YOU KNOW,
THERE'S A GREAT, QUOTE UNQUOTE,
POLITICAL STORY CALLED GRIEF.
IN THE STORY ALL THAT HAPPENED
IS A MAN WHO DRIVES A
HORSE-DRAWN CAB.
HIS SON HAS DIED EARLIER THAT
DAY.
THE WHOLE STORY IS HE CAN'T GET
ANYONE TO LISTEN TO HIM ABOUT
HIS HEART BREAK.
AT THE END OF THE STORY HE GOES
INTO THE STALL WITH THE HORSE
AND TAKES THE HORSE'S HEAD AND
JUST SAYS MY SON DIED TODAY.
I LOVED HIM VERY MUCH.
IS THAT A POLITICAL STORY?
NOT REALLY EXCEPT, YOU KNOW,
WE'RE TEN YEARS AWAY FROM THE
RUSSIAN REVOLUTION.
TO ME IF YOU WANT TO SORT OF
EXPLORE POLIL IDEA IN THE
HIGHEST POSSIBLE WAY, YOU EMBODY
IT IN THE PERSONAL.
BECAUSE THAT'S SOMETHING THAT NO
ONE CAN DENY.
WHATEVER YOUR SUPPOSED POLITICS
ARE, LEFT, RIGHT, IF YOU PUT IT
IN A HUMAN CONNECTION MOST
PEOPLE WILL RISE TO THE OCCASION
AND FEEL THE HUMAN PAIN IN THE
WAY THEY MIGHT NOT IF IT WAS
PRESENTED IN A MORE CONCEPTUAL
WAY.
>> Brown: SOME OF YOUR STORIES
PRESENT THE CONTEMPORARY
STRANGENESS OF LIFE BY TAKING US
A LITTLE BIT FURTHER INTO THE...
FURTHER INTO THE FUTURE AND
TAKING SOMETHING HAPPENING NOW
AND PUSHING IT EVEN FURTHER.
SO IT ALMOST HAS THE QUALITY OF
SCIENCE FICTION AT TIMES.
OTHER OF YOUR STORIES AND I SEE
MORE OF THEM IN THIS COLLECTION
FEEL MORE RIGHT OF THE MOMENT,
REALISTS.
>> RIGHT.
Brown: HUMANE IN A WAY.
I'VE BEEN MARRIED TO MY WIFE
PAULA FOR 25 YEARS.
WE HAVE WONDERFUL KIDS.
IT'S BEEN A REALLY RICH LIFE.
I START THINKING, IS THERE A WAY
TO GET THAT A LITTLE MORE IN THE
STORY THE IDEA THAT, YES, THINGS
CAN GO WRONG.
BUT ALSO THEY CAN GO RIGHT.
WHEN THEY DO, WHAT IS THE HUMAN
ACTIVITY THAT MAKES THAT
POSSIBLE?
HOW DO THINGS... HOW DO PEOPLE
DO GOOD BASICALLY?
I DIDN'T DO IT INTENTIONALLY BUT
I FOUND THAT SNEAKING INTO THESE
STORIES MORE AND MORE.
>> Brown: YOU'RE GETTING A LOT
OF GREAT ATTENTION HERE.
CRITICAL ACCLAIM.
PROFILES.
GREAT REVIEWS.
HOW DOES THAT FEEL?
>> IT'S REALLY WONDERFUL.
IT'S A NICE CHANCE TO WATCH YOUR
OWN MIND AND SEE HOW YOU REACT
TO THE ATTENTION.
I LOVE THE IDEA THAT MORE PEOPLE
WOULD READ SHORT FICTION.
IT'S A FORM THAT SOFTENS THE
BOUNDARIES BETWEEN PEOPLE.
I THINK IN OUR TIME, YOU KNOW,
WHERE SO MUCH OF THE INFORMATION
WE GET IS SORT OF PRE-POLARIZED.
FICTION HAS A WAY OF REMINDING
THAT WE ACTUALLY ARE VERY
SIMILAR IN OUR EMOTIONS AND OUR
NEUROLOGY AND OUR DESIRES ANDRS.
SO I THINK IT'S KIND OF A NICE
WAY TO NEUTRALIZE THAT
POLARIZATION.
SO I'M VERY HAPPY THAT, YOU
KNOW, IF I CAN DO A LITTLE BIT
OF WORK TO GET THE SHORT STORY
OUT THERE, I'M THRILLED.
>> Brown: THE NEW COLLECTION IS
10th OF DECEMBER.
GEORGE SAUNDERS, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
Brown: AT NOON EASTERN TIME
WE'RE HOSTING A LIVE ON-LINE
CHAT WITH GEORGE SAUNDERS.YOU CS
ABOUT HIS WORK AND MORE.
TO DO THAT JUST GO TO OUR HOME
PAGE, Nnewshour.pbs.org.
>> AGAIN, THE MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS
OF THE DAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA WENT
TO MINNEAPOLIS, IN A BID TO
BUILD SUPPORT FOR EFFORTS
AGAINST GUN VIOLENCE.
F.B.I. AGENTS RESCUED A
FIVE-YEAR-OLD BOY AFTER A
WEEK-LONG STAND-OFF.
HIS 65-YEAR-OLD CAPTOR WAS FOUND
DEAD.
AND A SUICIDE BOMBER IN IRAQ
STRUCK AT AN ANTI-AL-QAEDA
MILITIA, KILLING AT LEAST 22
PEOPLE AND WOUNDING 44.
ONLINE, WE REPORT ON A CHANGING
MEDIA LANDSCAPE IN ISRAEL.
HARI SREENIVASAN TELLS US MORE.
OUR REPORTING TEAM IN ISRAEL
EXAMINES HOW NEWSPAPERS THERE
HAVE BECOME INCREASINGLY
COMPETITIVE AND OPINIONATED,
SPURRED BY AMERICAN CASINO MOGUL
SHELDON ADELSON, WHO OWNS THE
COUNTRY'S MOST WIDELY READ DAILY
PAPER.
FIND THAT ALONG WITH ALL OF OUR
REPORTS FROM ISRAEL.
AND ON MAKING SENSE, LARRY
KOTLIKOFF SPINS A TALE OF
MARRIAGE, MURDER AND SOCIAL
SECURITY.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
JEFF?
>> Brown: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON TUESDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT THE
PRESIDENT'S SECOND TERM TACTICS
FOR PUSHING HIS PROPOSALS ON A
VARIETY OF ISSUES.
I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU, AND GOOD NIGHT.